---
title: "Valuing Interdependent Water and Energy Savings in Arizona"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2013-12-01-valuing
date: 2013-12-01
venue: 'Arizona State University Library Digital Repository'
type: 'thesis'
paperurl: 'https://repository.asu.edu/items/20341'
citation: '<b>Bartos, M.</b> (2013). Valuing interdependent water and energy savings in Arizona. Undergraduate Honors Thesis.'
tags: ['coupled-infrastructure-modeling', 'water-energy-nexus', 'life-cycle-assessment']
---

## Abstract

Water and energy resources are intrinsically linked, yet they are managed separately even in the water scarce America southwest. This study develops a spatially explicit model of water energy inter-dependencies in Arizona and assesses the potential for co beneficial conservation programs. The interdependent benefits of investments in 8 conservation strategies are assessed within the context of legislated renewable energy portfolio and energy efficiency standards. The co- benefits of conservation are found to be significant. Water conservation policies have the potential to reduce statewide electricity demand by 1.0-3.0 %, satisfying 3.3-10% of the state's mandated energy-efficiency-standard. Adoption of energy-efficiency measures and renewable generation portfolios can reduce non - agricultural water demand by 2.3-12%. The conservation co- benefits are typically not included in conservation plans or benefit cost analyses. Many co-benefits offer negative costs of saved water and energy, indicating that these measures provide water and energy savings at no net cost. Because ranges of costs and savings for water energy conservation measures are somewhat uncertain, future studies should investigate the co-benefits of individual conservation strategies in detail. Although this study focuses on Arizona, the analysis can be extended elsewhere as renewable portfolio and energy efficiency standards become more common nationally and internationally.
